[[tutorial-various-optimizations]]
== Tutorial Various Optimizations

The ordinary model checker of ProB enables the user to verify
automatically whether a B model contains any errors such as deadlocks
and invariant violations. The search for errors is performed by a graph
traversal algorithm exploring the state space until an error state has
been found or all states of the model have been explored. The runtime of
the model checker is mostly determined by the number of states of the
model being analyzed and thus model checking is generally limited by the
size of the state space of the model. The problem is also known as the
state space explosion problem.

To combat the state space explosion problem two advantageous techniques,
partial guard evaluation and partial order reduction, for the ordinary
model checker of ProB have been implemented for model checking
practically B and Event-B models with huge state spaces. This tutorial
describes how one can apply model checking using the optimizations and
additionally gives hints when it is recommendable to use these
optimizations.

[[partial-order-reduction]]
=== Partial Order Reduction

Partial order reduction (POR) is a method proposed for combating the
state space explosion problem by means of state space reduction. The
technique takes advantage of the commutativity of concurrently executed
actions. The reduction relies on selecting a subset of all enabled
actions in each reachable state of the state space aiming in this way to
reduce the number of possible orderings of actions. Basically, the idea
is to check only a fragment of the original state space that is
sufficient for checking the given property.

Take, for example, the following B machine:

....
MACHINE Example
VARIABLES x,y,z
INVARIANT
 x:INT & y:INT & z:INT
INITIALISATION x,y,z:=0,0,0
OPERATIONS
  IncX = PRE x=0 THEN x:= x+1 END;
  IncY = PRE y=0 THEN y:= y+1 END;
  IncZ = PRE z=0 THEN z:= z+1 END
END
....

The machine has a deadlock state. The deadlock state will be reached by
executing each of the operations IncX, IncY, and IncZ. The order of
executing the operations is irrelevant with respect to reaching the
deadlock state. This can be seen, for example, by observing the full
state space of the machine:

image::Full_state_space_por.png[]

Since the order in which the operations are executed is not relevant for
discovering the deadlock state it is sufficient to examine only one of
the six possible paths that start in the initial state and reach the
deadlock. Thus, for the machine it is enough to analyze only one
arbitrary order of the events in order to detect the deadlock:

image::Partial_state_space_por.png[]

Using this observation the ordinary model checker of ProB has been
extended to check a model formalized in B or Event-B using partial order
reduction. More information about the implementation of POR in ProB and
the theoretical background of POR can be read
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/pdf/DobrikovLeuschelPORtechreport.pdf[here].
Our implementation of POR uses the ample set theory footnote:[E.M.
Clarke, O. Grumberg, M. Minea, and D. Peled: _State Space Reduction
using Partial Order Reduction_. STTT '98, 3, pages 279-287].

For enabling the POR optimization for the model checker in Tcl/Tk
interface of ProB a new check box “Partial Order Reduction” has been
added to the “Model Checker” menu. Note that the option shows up only
when the user mode is set to “Normal” (see Preferences → User Mode in
the menu bar). The POR optimization can be enabled for model checking B
and Event-B models with the command line version of ProB by setting the
'por' preference to the value 'ample_sets'. For example, the machine
_Example_ can be checked for deadlock and invariant violations using the
POR optimization with the command line version of ProB as follows:

....
$ probcli Example.mch -mc 10000 -p por ample_sets
********* DETERMINE ACTION DEPENDENCIES AND ENABLE GRAPH *************
********** FINISHED ANALYSIS *************
Analysis Checking Time: 10 ms.

ALL OPERATIONS COVERED

found_error(deadlock,3)
finding_trace_from_to(root)

Model Checking Time: 40 ms (100 ms walltime)
States analysed: 3
Transitions fired: 4
*** COUNTER EXAMPLE FOUND ***

deadlock
*** TRACE:
 1: INITIALISATION(0,0,0):
 2: IncZ:
 3: IncX:
 4: IncY:
! *** error occurred ***
! deadlock
....

As a result the deadlock has been discovered by exploring in total 3
states using the Mixed DF/BF search strategy. Model checking the machine
without using POR will possibly explore more states until it finds out
the deadlock state (recall that the full state space of Example.mch
consists of 8 states). Note that the POR algorithm can be applied to all
exploration strategies (DF, BF, and Mixed DF/BF) of the ordinary model
checker of ProB.

The reduction of the state space takes effect by choosing a subset of
the set of all enabled transitions in the currently explored state. The
set of all enabled transitions in some state `s` is usually denoted by
`enabled(s)` and the subset of the transitions chosen to be executed in
`s` is denoted by `ample(s)`. The set `ample(s)` we call an ample set
for state `s`. Each ample set should satisfy certain conditions (the
ample set requirements) in order to guarantee that the reduction of the
state space is sound in regard to the property being checked on the
model. In fact, there are four conditions that each ample set should
satisfy:

* (A 1) `ample(s) = {} \<\=> enabled(s) = {}`
* (A 2) Along every finite execution in the original state space
starting in `s`, an event dependent on `ample(s)` cannot appear before
some event from `ample(s)` is executed
* (A 3) If `ample(s)` is a proper set of `enabled(s)`, then each
transition in `ample(s)` is a stutter transition.
* (A 4) For any cycle `C` in the reduced state space, if a state in `C`
has an enabled event `e`, then there exists a state `s` in `C` such that
`e` is an element of `ample(s)`.

To guarantee that all deadlocks in the full state space are also
preserved in the reduced state space it is sufficient when all computed
ample sets satisfy just the first two conditions . This suggests that in
some cases, when we check for deadlock freedom only, the reduction of
the state space may be more effective if each ample set satisfies only
the first two ample set requirements. That is, model checking with POR
usually tends to yield more state space reduction when checking a model
for deadlock freedom only than checking it for invariant violations or
simultaneously for deadlock freedom and invariant violations. (The
reduction algorithm of ProB has been adapted to this fact.) For this
reason, keep in mind to disable the “Invariant Violations” option if it
is intended to check a B or Event-B model just for deadlocks using the
POR optimization as the potential for more significant reduction of the
state space is higher.

The reduction algorithm makes use of the independence of transitions.
Two transitions `Op1` and `Op2` are called independent if for each state
s where both are enabled we have the following situation:

image::Independence.png[]

Let us assume that the transitions `Op1` and `Op2` in the Figure above
constitute the executions of two deterministic operations of a B
machine. Then we can say that the operations `Op1` and `Op2` are
independent, when they cannot disable one other and additionally both
possible orders of execution of the operations
latexmath:[$\langle Op1,Op2\rangle$] and
latexmath:[$\langle Op2,Op1\rangle$] starting in some state
latexmath:[$s$] reach the same state latexmath:[$s_3$]. If two
transitions are not independent, then both are denoted as dependent.

To find out whether two operations are independent one can analyze the
syntactical structure of both operations. If each of the operations
modifies variables of the machine not read by the other one and if both
operations modify different variables, then these operations are
considered to be independent. Besides performing only a syntactical
analysis, we use also the constraint-based facilities of ProB to
determine more exact relations between the operations. The reason for
those extra analyzes lies in the high potential for significant
reduction of the state space when the degree of independence of the
checked B model is high.

Thus, if we have a great amount of independent operations for some B
machine, then we have a great potential for significant state space
reduction. The results of the analyses for determining the independence
of operations for a particular B machine, which are used by the
reduction algorithm for computing the ample sets, can be viewed in the
menu bar of the Tcl/Tk interface of ProB: “Verify → Enabling Analysis →
Dependence Analysis (Table)”. For example, the dependency table for the
model 'Example.mch' looks as follows:

image::Dependency_table.png[]

The results in the dependency table for a pair of operations `Op1` and
`Op2` have the following meanings:

*  syntactic_independent : `Op1` and `Op2` are syntactically
independent; both events write different variables and no one of the
events can write a variable which is read by the other one
*  independent : one of the events or both events write variables read
only in the guard of the other one, though the events cannot disable
each other
*  dependent : the events are not independent
*  race_dependent : `Op1` and `Op2` have write variables in common
*  - : the dependency relation is symmetric, see `(Op2,Op1)` result
*  = : `Op1` and `Op2` represent the same event

To sum up, in order to take an advantage of POR the model being checked
should have many independent operations that are concurrently executed.
In other words, the magnitude of reduction depends on the coupling
between the operations in the B model. Thus, it is recommended to use
the reduced search when the analyzed model has comparatively many
independent operations that are concurrently executed in order to gain
from the improvement by the reduction technique. For example, if a B
model has no pair of independent operations or all independent
operations are not executed concurrently, i.e. two independent
operations are never simultaneously enabled, then no reductions of the
state space will be performed using the reduced search algorithm.

The reduction algorithm has been evaluated on various B and Event-B
models. The evaluation can be obtained
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/[here].

[[partial-guard-evaluation]]
=== Partial Guard Evaluation

When checking for consistency a B model the ProB model checker traverses
the state space of the model beginning in some of the initial states and
checks for errors each state, which it encounters. The ProB model
checker explores the state space of the B machine by applying all
operations of the machine to the current state. As a result, the
successor states of the state are determined. The exploration of the
state space continues until all possible states are explored or an error
state is found.

When a state, say `s`, is processed the following steps are consequently
performed:

1.  Checking `s` for errors like invariant violation, assertion
violation, and deadlock;
2.  Applying the machine's operations to `s`.

The second step is carried out in case no error was discovered
previously (in step 1). When step 2. is performed in some state `s` all
operations of the checked B model are tested for being enabled in `s`
and the substitutions of each enabled operation are performed at `s`.

The effort of checking a state amounts thus to checking the state for
errors (testing for invariant violation, assertion violations etc.) plus
the computation of the successors. There is some redundancy in testing
all operations' guards in each state, as usually there are operations
that are disabled in the states being explored. Especially, when the
model checker has to check exhaustively B models with large state spaces
the effort of testing the guard of each operation in every state may be
huge. Thus, an optimization may be considered by means of decreasing the
state space exploration complexity by trying to reduce the overall
number of guard tests via skipping the guard evaluations of operations
known to be disabled in some states.

One can determine a set of disabled operations in a state `s` by
considering, for example, the incoming transitions of `s`. During the
observation of the incoming transitions we examine how the operations
represented by the incoming transitions may influence other operations.
If, for example, operation ‘A’ surely disables operation ‘B’ we can
assume that ‘B’ is disabled at each state having ‘A’ as incoming
transition. This and other such relations can be used to optimize the
ProB model checker for exhaustively checking B models. This type of
relations we will also call _enabling relations_.

Enabling relations between operations reveal how operations of a given B
model could influence each other with regard to enabledness. In other
words, we are interested in the effect of executing one operation `Op1`
on the status of the guard of another operation `Op2` for each pair of
operations `(Op1,Op2)` of the underlying B model. The effect of an
operation `Op1` can affect the guard of another operation `Op2` in
various ways:

* `Op1` enables `Op2`, or
* `Op1` disables `Op2`, or
* `Op1` keeps `Op2` enabled respectively disabled;

This enabling relation of two operations we can illustrate, for example,
as follows:

image::RelationFigureExplanation.png[]

where the green boxes denote that the evaluation of the guard of `Op2`
is true, whereas the red boxes indicate that the evaluation of the guard
of `Op2` is false.

The model checker optimization, partial guard evaluation, makes use of
such a kind of relations. The enabling relations are determined by means
of syntactic and constraint-based analyses. In particular, we
concentrate on three kinds of enabling relations:

* `Op2` is *always* enabled after the execution of `Op1`

image::GuaranteedRelation.png[]

* `Op2` is *impossible* to be enabled after the execution of `Op1`

image::ImpossibleRelation.png[]

* `Op1` *keeps* `Op2` enabled respectively disabled

image::KeepRelation.png[]


Consider the B machine below modelling an algorithm for mutual exclusion
with a semaphore (in the machine below this is variable `y`) for two
concurrent processes latexmath:[$P_1$] and latexmath:[$P_2$]. Each
process has been simplified to perform three types of actions: _request_
(for entering in the critical section), _enter_ (entering the critical
section), and _release_ (exiting the critical section).

....
MACHINE MutualExclusion
SETS
  STATE={non_critical,waiting,critical}
VARIABLES
  p1,p2,y
INVARIANT
    y : 0 .. 1 & not(p1 = critical & p2 = critical)
INITIALISATION
 p1, p2, y := non_critical, non_critical, 1
OPERATIONS
  Req1 = PRE p1 = non_critical THEN p1 := waiting END;
  Enter1 = PRE p1 = waiting & y = 1 THEN p1 := critical || y := 0 END;
  Rel1 = PRE p1 = critical THEN p1 := non_critical || y := 1 END;
  Req2 = PRE p2 = non_critical THEN p2 := waiting END;
  Enter2 = PRE p2 = waiting & y = 1 THEN p2 := critical || y := 0 END;
  Rel2 = PRE p2 = critical THEN p2 := non_critical || y := 1 END
END
....

Every of the both processes latexmath:[$P_{i}$] has three possible
states that we will denote as follows: latexmath:[$n_{i}$] (the state in
which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] performs noncritical actions),
latexmath:[$w_{i}$] (the state in which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] waits to
enter the critical section), and latexmath:[$c_{i}$] (representing the
state in which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] is in the critical section). Both
processes share the binary semaphore y, where y=1 indicates that the
semaphore is free and y=0 that the semaphore is currently processed by
one of the processes.

In the B machine the operations `Req1`, `Enter1` and `Rel1` represent
the actions _request_, _enter_ and _release_ of latexmath:[$P_1$],
respectively. Analogously, the operations `Req2`, `Enter2` and `Rel2`
represent the actions _request_, _enter_ and _release_ of
latexmath:[$P_2$], respectively. The requirement _always at most one
process is in its critical section_ guaranteeing the mutual exclusion
property is stated in the invariant of the machine by means of the
predicate `not(p1 = crit1 & p2 = crit2)`.

To verify that the B machine satisfy the mutual exclusion property and
has no deadlock state one can use the ProB model checker. This will
explicitly generate all possible states of the machine and check whether
there is any state that is a deadlock state or that violates the
invariant. As a result, 8 states will be generated and checked, the
machine is consistent with respect to the invariant and has no deadlock
state. By the exhaustive search for error states the model checker will
test by exploring the state space each guard of the machine’s operations
for being enabled in the currently processed state. That is, while
exploring the state space of the machine 48 guard tests (8 states
latexmath:[$\times$] 6 operations) will be performed in order to unfold
the entire state space of the MutualExclusion machine.

image::StateSpacePGE.png[]

The state space of the `MutualExclusion` machine is visualised in Figure
1. The symbols latexmath:[$n_i$], latexmath:[$w_i$] and
latexmath:[$c_i$] in Figure 1 denote the bindings
latexmath:[$p_i = non_critical$], latexmath:[$p_i = waiting$] and
latexmath:[$p_i = critical$] (where _i=1,2_), respectively. Observing,
for example, the operation `Req1` in `MutualExclusion.mch` one can
easily deduce that the operations `Req1` and `Rel1` will be disabled in
the after-state of each `Req1` transition. This can be simply inferred
by seeing that assigning the variable _p1_ the constant _waiting_ leads
to a state in which both predicates _p1=non_critical_ and _p1=critical_
evaluate to false. That is, `Req1` and `Rel1` are *impossible* to be
enabled after executing `Req1`. Further, since `Req1` writes only the
variable _p1_ we can conclude that the guards of the operations `Req2`,
`Enter2` and `Rel2` cannot be affected after executing `Req1`, i.e.
`Req1` *keeps* the enabling status of `Req2`, `Enter2` and `Rel2`
unchanged. These relations can be determined in ProB by means of
syntactic and constraint-based analyses.

The enabling relations between the operations of `MutualExclusion.mch`
used for the Partial Guard Evaluation optimisation are summerised in the
table below. The enabling relations _guaranteed_ and _enable_ indicate
the cases when the guard of an operation is *guaranteed* enabled after
the execution another operation and when an operation *can be enabled*
after the execution of another operation but the enabledness is not
always guaranteed, respectively.

[cols=",,,,,,",]
|=======================================================================
|Origin |Req1 |Enter1 |Rel1 |Req2 |Enter2 |Rel2

|Req1 | [red]#impossible# |enable | [red]#impossible# | [yellow]#keep# | [yellow]#keep# | [yellow]#keep#

|Enter1 | [red]#impossible# | [red]#impossible# | [green]#guaranteed# | [yellow]#keep# | [red]#impossible# |
[yellow]#keep#

|Rel1 | [green]#guaranteed# | [red]#impossible# | [red]#impossible# | [yellow]#keep# |enable | [yellow]#keep#

|Req2 | [yellow]#keep# | [yellow]#keep# | [yellow]#keep# | [red]#impossible# |enable | [red]#impossible#

|Enter2 | [yellow]#keep# | [red]#impossible# | [yellow]#keep# | [red]#impossible# | [red]#impossible# |
[green]#guaranteed#

|Rel2 | [yellow]#keep# |enable | [yellow]#keep# | [green]#guaranteed# | [red]#impossible# | [red]#impossible#
|=======================================================================

Let us now consider state latexmath:[$s_2$] in Figure 1 that we assume
to be yet not explored by the model checker. latexmath:[$s_2$] is an
after-state of `Req1`. Using the enabling relations that we have
established we can infer that `Req1` and `Rel1` are disabled at
latexmath:[$s_2$] since both are impossible to be enabled in each
after-state of `Req1`. Further, we can omit the tests of the guards of
`Enter2` and `Rel2` since both operations are disabled in
latexmath:[$s_1$] and we already have shown that `Req1` cannot change
the status of the guard of both operations. As a result, we can skip the
test for enabledness for `Req1`, `Rel1`, `Enter2` and `Rel2` in
latexmath:[$s_2$]. The test of the guard of `Req2` can also be omitted
since `Req2` is enabled in latexmath:[$s_1$] and thus also enabled in
latexmath:[$s_2$] as `Req1` keeps `Req2` enabled. Summarizing these
results, it is thus necessary to test only the guard of `Enter1` in
latexmath:[$s_2$] as we could determine the status of the guards of the
residual operations via the enabling relations that we considered
previously.

Partial guard evaluation (PGE) makes use of the enabling relations.
Above we described how guard tests can be saved up aiming to optimise
the exploration of the state space and thus to provide smaller model
checking times for B models, as well as for Event-B models. The
optimisation can be enabled using the preference ('-p') option in case
the command line of the ProB tool is used for model checking:

....
$ probcli -mc 1000000 MutualExclusion.mch -p use_pge true
********** START PGE ANALYSIS *************
********** PGE ANALYSIS FINISHED **********
Analysis Checking Time: 40 ms.

ALL OPERATIONS COVERED

% All open nodes visited
Model Checking Time: 10 ms (50 ms walltime)
States analysed: 8
Transitions fired: 15
No Counter Example found. ALL nodes visited.
....

For our example, `MutualExclusion.mch`, the PGE analysis needed 40ms to
determine the enabling relations of the machine and saved up overall 34
guard evaluations while exploring the state space of the model. ProB
uses by default a mixed breath-first/depth-first search for the
exploration of the state space.

The number of skipped guard tests may depend on the exploration strategy
when the model checker is started with the partial guard evaluation
method. To clarify this consider again the B machine formilising the
mutual exclusion algorithm with semaphore for two processes. Assume
first that the state space is explored in a depth-first manner and that
the currently explored state is latexmath:[$s_7$] in Figure 2.
Additionally, latexmath:[$s_1$], latexmath:[$s_2$] and latexmath:[$s_4$]
are the states that were explored before reaching latexmath:[$s_7$].
Before exploring state latexmath:[$s_7$] the PGE algorithm analyses
which operations can be determined as disabled in latexmath:[$s_7$]
using the results from the enabling analysis and observing the currently
present incoming transitions of latexmath:[$s_7$]. From Figure 2 we can
see that the only incoming transition of the explored state space till
that moment is `Req2`. Since it is impossible for the operations `Req2`
and `Rel2` to be enabled after the execution of `Req2` we can infer that
both are disabled at state latexmath:[$s_7$]. Further, as `Req1` and
`Enter1` are disabled at latexmath:[$s_5$] we can also assume that both
operations are also disabled at latexmath:[$s_7$], for `Req2` cannot
change the enabling status of `Req1` and `Enter1`. On the other hand,
`Rel1` can be considered as enabled at latexmath:[$s_7$] because of its
enabledness in latexmath:[$s_5$]. In the end, we could determine that
the operations `Req1`, `Enter1`, `Req2` and `Rel2` are disabled at
latexmath:[$s_7$] and we could infer that `Rel1` is enabled at
latexmath:[$s_7$] without testing their guards for enabledness. The only
operation that we need to test for enabledness in latexmath:[$s_7$] is
`Enter2`.

image::StateSpaceDepthFirst.png[]

Let us now consider the explored state space in Figure 3. Using
breadth-first search will explore all states above latexmath:[$s_7$] and
latexmath:[$s_8$] until latexmath:[$s_7$] is reached. When
latexmath:[$s_7$] is explored the operation `Enter1` will also be
considered in the course of analysing which operations are disabled and
enabled at latexmath:[$s_7$] as in the figure below state
latexmath:[$s_5$] was already explored and `Enter1` is an incoming
transition of latexmath:[$s_7$]. Using the results from the table above,
we can infer that `Enter2` is disabled at latexmath:[$s_7$] since it is
impossible for `Enter2`to be enabled after the execution of `Enter1`
(see the Enabling Analysis table above). If we use the results inferred
by analysing the enabling relation in regard to `Req2`, then we can
conclude that all operations are disabled in latexmath:[$s_7$] except
for `Rel1`. Thus, in this case we saved up one guard test more in
comparison to the depth-first search example.

image::StateSpaceBreadthFirst.png[]

Model checking with partial guard evaluation usually tends to decrease
more significantly the number of guards being tested using breadth-first
search in comparison to the other two exploration strategies. This is
due to the fact that in breadth-first search we explore all states from
the current level before we begin with the exploration of the next level
states. In this way, when the current state is explored the possibility
that more incoming transitions are computed than other search strategies
is higher.

In the table below we list some benchmarks for evaluating the PGE
optimisation. The test cases with '+PGE' use partial guard evaluation as
an optimisation for model checking the models. In the *Skipped/Total
Guard Tests* column the number of omitted guard tests and the total
number of guards are given.

image::PGEEvaluationTable.png[]

In all test cases except for 'All Enabled' and 'Cruise Control' model
checking with PGE has provided better performance results than model
checking without PGE. The results show that partial guard evaluation can
improve model checking up to factor 2. The larger the state space the
higher is the possibility for better performance in model checking B
models. For example, for 'CAN BUS' the optimisation could speed up model
checking to factor 2, whereas for the 'Crusie Control' model no
improvement could be detected although a significant number of guard
evaluations could be saved up.

These and various other benchmarks used for evaluating partial guard
evaluation (PGE) can be viewed
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/[here].

=== References
