= Tutorial LTL Counter-example View

In this tutorial a quick overview will be given describing the LTL
counter-example visualization plug-in in Rodin. The functionality of the
plug-in will be presented by means of an Event-B model on which
different properties will be checked that are not satisfied by the
model.

[[ltl-model-checking-and-the-meaning-of-counter-examples]]
=== LTL Model Checking and the Meaning of Counter-examples

Model checking is a technique for checking in an automatic way whether a
model satisfies a property expressed in formal logic. LTL (standing for
linear temporal logic) is a version of the temporal logic used mainly
for encoding time-dependent properties of systems.

Verifying whether a system fulfills an LTL property by means of model
checking is realized by searching a path in the state space of the
system that violates the property being checked. That is, if the system
behaves in a way violating the LTL property being checked, then the
erroneous behavior will be reported by returning a path (mostly
infinite) representing the false behavior. Otherwise, if no
counter-example was found, it will be considered that the system
satisfies the LTL property.

The LTL model checker of ProB provides three types of counter-examples:

1.  Finite path leading to a deadlock state (see Figure 1):

image::Deadlock_path.png[]

2.  Infinite path (see Figure 2), the infinite path in this case is
represented by means of a loop:

image::LTLViewInfinitePath.png[]

3.  Finite path (see Figure 3). (In this case an infinite path
representing the respective counter-example has been shortened in order
to attract the attention to the relevant part of the counter-example).

image::LTLViewFinitePath.png[]

Intuitively, the first two types of counter-examples (Figure 1 and
Figure 2) constitute a violation of a liveness footnote:[The first type
of a counter-example (Figure 1) can in some cases be a valid
counter-example for safety properties. For example, if the model cannot
perform any actions, then a path possessing only single deadlock state
is a counter-example for each LTL formula latexmath:[$X^{n} (true)$],
with latexmath:[$n\geq 1$].] property, whereas the path in Figure 3
represents usually a counter-example for a safety property.

=== Visualization of Counter-examples in Rodin

*Coloring and highlighting nodes in a counter-example*
Each state of a path in the LTL counter-example view is marked by a
respective color that denotes the evaluation of an LTL formula at that
state. There are three possible statuses (colors) that a state _s_ may
have in respect to an LTL formula _f_:

*  T : the value of _f_ is true at _s_
*  F : the value of _f_ is false at _s_
*  U : the value of _f_ cannot be determined at _s_ (unknown value)

A state will be colored in grey if the value of the respective LTL
formula cannot be determined. This may happen in case the
counter-example is represented by finite path. For example, evaluating
the LTL formula ‘X \{p2=crit2}’ on a path of length two where the value
of _p2_ is not equal to _crit2_ in both states (see Figure 4) yields the
following coloring of the states in Rodin: footnote:[The visualization
refers to the LTL formula ‘XX \{p2=crit2}’. However, in this example we
are interested in the coloring of the states in regard to the LTL
formula ‘X \{p2=crit2}’.]

image::LTLViewVisualisation1.png[]

Since the value of the atom ‘\{p2=crit2}’ in latexmath:[$s_{1}$] is
equal to false the value of the LTL formula ‘X \{p2=crit2}’ in
latexmath:[$s_{0}$] is also equal to false. Therefore, the first state
is colored in red. On the other hand, the value of the formula ‘X
\{p2=crit2}’ in latexmath:[$s_{1}$] is unknown as there is no successor
state of latexmath:[$s_{1}$] in the path, as shown in Figure 4.
Accordingly, the second state in the LTL counter-example viewer will be
colored in grey.

image::LTLViewFinitePathUnknown.png[]

States in the path considered to be significant for the evaluation of
the respective LTL formula are highlighted by bright colors.
Accordingly, the other states will be grayed out.

Consider the path in Figure 5 that can be reported as a counter-example
for the LTL formula ‘\{p1=noncrit1} U \{p1=crit1}’. footnote:[An LTL
formula latexmath:[$\phi U \psi$] is satisfied by a path
latexmath:[$\pi$] if there exists a state latexmath:[$s$] in
latexmath:[$\pi$] fulfilling latexmath:[$\psi$] and latexmath:[$\phi$]
holds at all states of latexmath:[$\pi$] until latexmath:[$s$] is
reached.] As a consequence, the LTL counter-example view will display
the following visualization of the counter-example:

image::LTLViewVisualisation2.png[]

The path in Figure 5 violates ‘\{p1=noncrit1} U \{p1=crit1}’ since the
goal (‘\{p1=crit1}’) of the until-formula does not hold in all states of
the path. This is illustrated by means of the bottom colored path in the
picture above. Both states have been colored with bright red as both are
significant for the violation of the until-formula in regard to
‘\{p1=crit1}’.

The upper path in the picture above has been evaluated and colored in
regard to the condition (‘\{p1=noncrit1}’) of the until-formula. The
critical state here is the second one as ‘\{p1=noncrit1}’ does not hold
in that state and therefore it is highlighted by bright red. On the
other hand, the atom ‘\{p1=noncrit1}’ holds in latexmath:[$s_{0}$] and
thus the state is colored in green. latexmath:[$s_{0}$] has been grayed
out since the evaluation of ‘\{p1=noncrit1}’ in that state has no
significant meaning for the violation of ‘\{p1=noncrit1} U
\{p1=crit1}’.

image::LTLViewFinitePathUntil.png[]

Notice, for a given LTL formula _f_ the values (or the colors) of the
states are set in regard to the evaluation of the sub-formula/-s of _f_
and highlighted with respect to the semantics of _f_. In case of the
formula ‘\{p1=noncrit1} U \{p1=crit1}’ the states are colored in regard
to the atoms ‘\{p1=noncrit1}’ and ‘\{p1=crit1}’ and highlighted in
regard to the semantics of the until-operator.

_' Obtaining transition and state information_'
A path reported as a counter-example of an LTL formula represents a
possible trace of the model being analyzed. In some cases it may be
helpful to know which transitions are executed along the path in order
to reproduce the erroneous behavior of the model (e.g. by animating the
trace). To see which transitions are being executed in the
counter-example hold the mouse cursor on the respective edge. A label
will appear with the transition name:

image::LTLViewVisualisation3.png[]

Another way to find out the transitions of the path is to inspect the
current trace loaded in the history view.

To view a state of a counter-example shown in the LTL counter-example
view perform a double-click action on the respective state. After
double-clicking a state the relevant information (variables’ evaluation,
invariant evaluation, etc.) of the state is displayed in the state view
and the trace leading to the double-clicked state is loaded in the
history view.

*Number of visualizations per LTL formula*
The counter-example reported by the LTL model checker will be visualized
in regard to all operators used in the LTL formula. For example, three
different visualizations will be illustrated for ‘G (\{p1=wait1} => F
\{p1=crit1})’ as shown in the picture below. footnote:[There are five
sub-formulas for ‘G (\{p1=wait1} => F \{p1=crit1})’: ‘G (\{p1=wait1} =>
F \{p1=crit1})’, ‘\{p1=wait1} => F \{p1=crit1}’, ‘\{p1=wait1}’, ‘F
\{p1=crit1}’, and ‘\{p1=crit1}’. However, the number of visualizations
corresponds not to the number of sub-formulas, but to the number of the
operators used in the LTL formula.]:

image::LTLViewVisualisation4.png[]

In order to view the visualizations of the sub-formulas, one should
click on one of the states of the source-formula.

=== Use Case for the LTL Counter-example Viewer

Consider an Event-B model formalizing an algorithm for mutual exclusion
with semaphores for two concurrent processes latexmath:[$P_1$] and
latexmath:[$P_2$]. Each process has been simplified to perform three
types of events: request (for entering in the critical section), enter
(entering the critical section), and release (exiting the critical
section).

image::LTLViewMUTEXEvents.png[]

Each process latexmath:[$P_{i}$] has three possible states that are
denoted by the constants latexmath:[$noncrit_{i}$] (the state in which
latexmath:[$P_{i}$] performs noncritical actions),
latexmath:[$wait_{i}$] (the state in which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] waits to
enter the critical section), and latexmath:[$crit_{i}$] (representing
the state in which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] is in the critical section). Both
processes share the binary semaphore y, where y=1 indicates that the
semaphore is free and y=0 that the semaphore is currently processed by
one of the processes.

There are several requirements that the mutual exclusion algorithm
should satisfy. The most important one is the mutual exclusion property
that says _always at most one process is in its critical section_. This
can be simply expressed, for example, as an invariant of the respective
Event-B model: ‘not(p1 = crit1 & p2 = crit2)’. However, there are other
properties that can be easily expressed by means of LTL formulas and
automatically checked on the model. For example, the requirement _each
process will enter infinitely often its critical section_ can be
specified by the LTL formula `GF \{p1 = crit1} & GF \{p2 = crit2}` and
the starvation freedom property that states _each waiting process will
eventually enter its critical section_ can be encoded in LTL by means of
the formula `G (\{p1 = wait1} => F \{p1 = crit1}) & G (\{p2 = wait2} =>
F \{p2=crit2}) `.

The second requirement _each process will enter infinitely often its
critical section_ can be divided in two single requirements:

1.  Process 1 will enter infinitely often its critical section (‘GF
\{p1=crit1}’)
2.  Process 2 will enter infinitely often its critical section (‘GF
\{p2=crit2}’)

Running the LTL model checker of ProB with the LTL formula ‘GF
\{p1=crit1}’ on the MUTEX model will provide the following path as a
counter-example, where the equations in the set braces represent the
current variables’ evaluation in the respective state and the labels
above the edges the executed events in the path:

image::LTLViewCEForGF1.png[]

Obviously the property ‘GF \{p1=crit1}’ is violated for the path in
Figure 6 since it constitutes an infinite path where no state exists in
which _p1_ is equal to _crit1_. The counter-example for ‘GF \{p1=crit1}’
will be then visualized as follows:

image::LTLViewVisualisation5.png[]

Each state of the counter-example is colored in red since ‘F
\{p1=crit1}’ does not hold for all states of the path. Additionally,
state latexmath:[$s_{0}$] has been highlighted since *all* paths
starting in latexmath:[$s_{0}$] do not satisfy ‘F \{p1=crit1}’ (the
semantic of the globally-operator).

To see why the LTL formula ‘F \{p1=crit1}’ does not hold in each state
of the path in Figure 6 click on one of the nodes in the visualization.
As a result, a second box will appear visualizing the counter-example in
regard to the LTL formula ‘F \{p1=crit1}’. In the second visualization
all states are colored in red since ‘p1=crit1’ does not hold in all
states. All states are highlighted as well since ‘F \{p1=crit1}’ holds
if and only if there is a state in which _p1_ is equal to _crit1_ and
thus all states are significant for the violation of the formula.

image::LTLViewVisualisation6.png[]

For the starvation freedom property (_each waiting process will
eventually enter its critical section_) of process P1 three operators
are needed for encoding it in LTL: ‘G (\{p1=wait1} => F \{p1=crit1})’.
The mutual exclusion model violates the property because it permits the
second process P2 to perform infinitely often consecutively the events
Req2, Enter2, Rel2 and thus not allowing process P1 to get access to its
critical section. This means that the path in Figure 6 may also be
reported as a counter-example for ‘G (\{p1=wait1} => F \{p1=crit1})’ by
the LTL model checker. As a consequence, the following visualization
will be shown in the LTL counter-example view:

image::LTLViewVisualisation4.png[]

In this visualization the crucial state for violating the property ‘G
(\{p1=wait1} => F \{p1=crit1})’ is latexmath:[$s_{1}$] since at this
state ‘p1=wait1’ becomes true. Once a state is encountered where
‘p1=wait1’ holds, it should be guaranteed that eventually ‘p1=crit1’
will hold. This is apparently not fulfilled as in all successor states
_p1_ will not become equal to _crit1_.

=== Literature Sources

For more detailed information on visualizing counter-examples in the LTL
counter-example view in Rodin refer to footnote:[Andriy Tolstoy,
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/mediawiki/images/1/10/Master_tolstoy.pdf[_Visualisierung
von LTL-Gegenbeispielen_], Master Thesis.]. For a thorough introduction
to LTL and LTL model checking consult footnote:[E. M. Clarke, Jr.,
Grumberg, and D.A. Peled. _Model Checking_. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
USA, 1999.] or footnote:[C. Baier and J.-P. Katoen. _Principles of Model
Checking_. MIT Press, 2008.].

The Event-B model used in this tutorial can be downloaded from
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/~dobrikov/modelchecking/MUTEX.zip[here].

=== References
