:wikifix: 2
ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
[[tutorial-disprover]]
= Tutorial Disprover

:category: User_Manual


[[warning]]
WARNING
~~~~~~~

We believe the Disprover to be useful. The disprover plugin is currently
still experimental when used as a prover. Please keep in mind, that you
might run into some rough edges or even get wrong results (please inform
us about any issues).

[[introduction]]
Introduction
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ProB Disprover plugin for RODIN utilizes the ProB animator and model
checker to automatically find counterexamples or proofs for a given
proof obligation.

An early version of the ProB Disprover is described in
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/publications_detail.php?id=219[Debugging
Event-B Models using the ProB Disprover Plug-in], Ligot, Bendisposto,
Leuschel.

Recently, the Disprover has been extended to detect cases in which the
search for a counter-example was complete, yet there was no result. In
this cases, the absence of a counter-example will be reported as a
proof. See http://stups.hhu.de/w/Special:Publication/disprover_eval[the
paper describing the disprover as a prover] for more details.

[[installation]]
Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ProB Disprover is currently only available through the ProB Nightly
Build Update Site
(http://nightly.cobra.cs.uni-duesseldorf.de/rodin/updatesite/).

[[how-to-use-it]]
How to use it
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

image::disprover-all.png[]

The proof obligation editor in Rodin presents the user with a number of Hypotheses and one
Goal, to be proved. If the Disprover is installed, it is available in
the tool bar alongside the other provers:

image::disprover_proof_control.png[]

[[how-it-works]]
How it works
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Upon selecting the Disprover, it builds a formula from the Hypotheses
and the negated Goal. The ProB model checker then tries to find a model
for that formula. If that is possible, this model is a counter example
that will be presented back to the user in the proof tree. The disprover
also checks if there cannot be a model for the formula. If this is the
case it acts like a decision procedure, i.e., absence of a model is a
proof for the goal. This is shown in the proof tree as follows:

image::disprover_proof.png[]

Unfortunately, sometimes neither a counter example nor a proof can be
found.
