ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
As of version 1.5.1 ProB supports
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Common_subexpression_elimination[common
subexpression elimination (CSE)].

[[basics-of-cse]]
Basics of CSE
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To enable CSE you need to set the advanced preference `CSE` to true
(this can be done using the switch `-p CSE TRUE` when using the
link:/Using_the_Command-Line_Version_of_ProB[command-line version
probcli] or using the Advanced Preferences command in ProB Tcl/Tk). With
CSE enabled, ProB will translate the predicate

`x:dom(f(a)) & r=f(a)(x)`

into

`(LET @0==(f(a)) IN x ∈ dom(@0) ∧ r = @0(x))`

before evaluating it. As you can see, the common sub-expression `f(a)`
has been lifted into a LET statement. This has the advantage that the
expression `f(a)` will only get evaluated once (rather than twice, in
case `x:dom(f(a))`). Identifiers introduced by the CSE always start with
the @-sign. As another example, the predicate

`x*x+2*x > y*y*y & y*y*y > x*x+2*x`

gets translated into

`LET @2==(x*x+2*x) IN (LET @4==((y*y)*y) IN @2 > @4 & @4 > @2))`

You may observe that the B-language does not have a let-construct for
expression nor predicates (only for substitutions). There are various
ways one can overcome this (e.g., using an existential quantifier for a
predicate), but ProB adds its own LET-construct to the language in the
interpreter. Moreover, to avoid issues with well-definedness and
ensuring that ProB only evaluates the LET expressions when really
needed, this LET has a different behaviour than the ``standard''
constructs. Indeed, ProB's LET is lazy, i.e., it will only evaluate the
expression when required by the computation of the body of the LET. For
example, in

`LET @1==f(a) IN 2>3 & @1+@1>10`

the expression `f(a)` will never be evaluated. This is important for
well-definedness (e.g., suppose a is not in the domain of f) and for
performance.

[[substitutions]]
Substitutions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To enable CSE also inside substitutions (aka B statements) you need to
set the preference `CSE_SUBST` to true. By default, the CSE will only be
applied to top-level predicates, such as the invariant, the assertions,
the properties or individual predicates inside operations (but not the
operation as a whole).

[[sharing-predicates]]
Sharing Predicates
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

By default ProB's CSE will also share predicates. You can turn off CSE
for predicates, i.e., only expressions get shared, by setting the
preference `CSE_PRED` to `FALSE`. For example, by default ProB's CSE
will translate

`x+1 > 10 & (x+1 > 10 => y=22)`

into

`LET @1==(x + 1 > 10) IN @1 & (@1 => y = 22)`

After setting `CSE_PRED` to `FALSE`, this will be translated into:

`LET @0==(x + 1) IN @0 > 10 & (@0 > 10 => y = 22)`

[[other-preferences]]
Other Preferences
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ProB will also share expressions which are potentially not well-defined,
and takes extra care with those expressions (in particular in the
context of set comprehensions and quantifications). However, you can
completely turn off sharing of potentially not-well defined expressions
by setting the preference `CSE_WD_ONLY` to `TRUE`. For example, by
default the following predicate

`x>1 & 100/x > 20 & 100/x <26`

will get translate into

`LET @0==(100 / x) IN (x > 1 & @0 > 20) & @0 < 26)`

and ProB will find the solution `x=4`. With `CSE_WD_ONLY` to `TRUE`, the
predicate will be left unchanged (and ProB will find the same solution).

[[tips]]
Tips
~~~~

To inspect the effect of CSE, you do one of the following:

* In ProB Tcl/Tk you can use the command ``Show Internal
Representation'' in the Debug menu to inspect the effect of CSE on your
machine
* For probcli, you can use the command `-pp FILE` to write the
pretty-printed internal representation of your machine after CSE to a
file
* For the REPL of probcli (command -repl), you can use the option
`-p REPL_UNICODE TRUE` to force ProB to print your
expressions/predicates after CSE processing (using Unicode characters)
