/Category:User_Manual[Category:User Manual]

Make sure you have the Lift.mch model from the first part of the
tutorial: link:/Tutorial_First_Step[Starting ProB and first animation
steps].

[[operation-with-many-solutions-for-the-parameters]]
Operation with many solutions for the parameters
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Add the following operation to the Lift model:

....
jump(level) = PRE level : 0..99 THEN floor := level END
....

Now reload your model and initialise the machine. Your ProB window
should now look as follows:

/file:ProB_LiftWithJump.png[center||500px]

As you can see, only 10 values for the level parameter of the jump
operation are displayed in the ``Enabled Operations'' pane. The orange
``max'' button to the left of ``Enabled Operation'' tells you that not
all possible parameter values for the operations were computed.

There are several solutions to overcome this.

[[increasing-max_operations]]
Increasing MAX_OPERATIONS
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

First, you could increase the ``MAX_OPERATIONS'' preference of ProB by
selecting the ``Animation Preferences'' command in the ``Preferences''
menu:

/file:ProB_Lift_MAX_OPERATIONS.png[center||350px]

You should then set the preference "" to at least 101 and then re-load
the B machine.

/file:ProB_Lift_OpPane_WithJump101.png[center||200px]

[[executing-an-operation-by-predicate]]
Executing an Operation by Predicate
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The alternative is to provide the parameter value for `level` yourself.
For this, select the ``Execute an Operation...'' command in the animate
menu:

/file:ProB_Lift_ExecuteOperationMenu.png[center||200px]

After that, select the `jump` operation

/file:ProB_ExecuteOperation.png[center||350px]

and you will be provided with the following dialog:

/file:ProB_Lift_ExecuteOperation_Dialog.png[center||490px]

Type in `98` into the level field and hit the ``Execute'' button.

/file:ProB_Lift_OpPane_WithJump_Exec98.png[center||490px]

Note: instead or in addition to providing concrete values, you can also
specify a predicate that constrains the values of the parameters:
/file:ProB_Lift_ExecuteOperation_Dialog_Pred.png[center||490px]

The above predicate, `level>96 & level mod 2 =0` would select the same
value `98` for level. When there are multiple solutions, ProB will only
execute the operation for the first solution found.

[[using-random-enumeration]]
Using Random enumeration
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You can also tell ProB to try and perform random enumerations. This
feature is available in ProB 1.5.0 or newer. You add the following lines
to your model:

`DEFINITIONS` +
`  SET_PREF_RANDOMISE_ENUMERATION_ORDER == TRUE`

Alternatively, you can set this preference using the ``Advanced
Preferences'' pane in the Preferences menu. After reloading the machine
you should see a picture similar to the following one:

/file:ProB_Lift_Randomise.png[center||650px]

[[using-constraint-based-validation-techniques]]
Using Constraint-Based Validation Techniques
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

[[find-sequence]]
Find Sequence
+++++++++++++

You can also use the constraint solver to construct sequences which are
of interest to you. Let us add the following operation to the lift
model:

`top_reached = PRE floor=99 THEN skip END`

Now suppose we want to execute this new operation as early as possible.
We can ask the constraint solver to generate a feasible sequence of
operations. First select the ``Find Sequence...'' command in the Verify
menu:

/file:FindSequenceMenu.png[center||400px]

Now type in

` jump ; top_reached`

in this dialog box:

/file:FindSequenceDialog.png[center||500px]

ProB will then find a solution operation sequence for you and execute
it:

/file:FindSequenceResult.png[center||300px]

[[constraint-based-model-based-testing]]
Constraint-Based Model-Based Testing
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

Alternatively, you could for example use the constraint-based test-case
generator to find for every operation the shortest trace that enables
it.

First select the ``Constraint-based Testcase Generation..'' command in
the Analyse menu:

/file:CBCMBTMenu.png[center||400px]

Now click on the ok button in the dialog box (which allows you to select
the target operations to cover in the generated test cases):

/file:CBCMBTDialog.png[center||200px]

ProB will then find four test cases for you, one for each operation:

/file:CBCMBTResult.png[center||400px]

You can also visualise these test cases as a tree by clicking the ``View
Tree'' button:

/file:CBCMBTTreeResult.png[center||600px]

Green entries show test cases (traces which cover an operation in the
shortest possible way), gray entries are traces which did not contribute
to a test case.

More details are available in the
link:/Tutorial_Model-Based_Testing[Tutorial_Model-Based_Testing] and
link:/Tutorial_Model_Checking,_Proof_and_CBC[Tutorial_Model_Checking,_Proof_and_CBC]
sections.
