/Category:User_Manual[Category:User Manual]

[[installation]]
Installation
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Start off by installing the standalone Tcl/Tk version of ProB. Follow
the instructions in link:/Installation[Installation].

[[starting-prob]]
Starting ProB
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Start ProB by double-clicking on `ProBWin` (for Windows users), or by
launching `StartProB.sh` from a Terminal (for Linux and Mac users).

/file:ProBWinContents.png[center]

Mac users may also be able to launch ProB by double-clicking on
`StartProB.sh`.

This should bring up a window as follows (on a Mac):
/file:ProBStartWindow.png[center||500px]

In case this does not work, please have a look at the output of ProB in
the terminal window (on Windows a separate window will be automatically
started) and send us a description of what is printed in that window
along with a detailed report (list which operating system you use, which
version it is, which version of ProB have you downloaded, etc.).
Normally, it should look as follows (on Windows):
/file:ProBStartTerminal.png[center||400px]

[[loading-a-first-b-machine]]
Loading a first B machine
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Use the ``Open...'' command in the ``File'' menu
/file:ProBWinOpen.png[center] and then navigate to the ``Examples''
directory that came with your ProB installation:
/file:ProBWinExamplesFolder.png[center||400px]

Inside the samples folder, open the ``Lift.mch'' machine. Your main ProB
window should now look as follows:

/file:ProB_LiftAfterLoad.png[center||500px]

[[first-steps-in-animation]]
First Steps in Animation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We have now loaded a first simple B model. Let us look at the contents
of the ProB window (ignoring the menu bar).

* The upper half of the ProB window contains the source code of the
model.
* The lower half contains three panes.
** The ``State Properties'' pane contains information about the current
state of the model. We will explain the contents of this pane in more
detail later.
** The Pane called ``Enabled Operations'' contains a list of operations
that can be applied to your model. Before a B machine can be animated,
we have to initialise it. Hence, initially the only option presented is
```INITIALISATION(4)`''. The `4` indicates that the initialisation will
set the main variable of the machine (`floor`) to the value 4. This
information is useful in case multiple initialisations are possible (in
order to distinguish them).
** The History pane contains the list of operations you have executed to
reach the current state of the animator. Obviously, this list is
initially empty.

Now, double click on ```INITIALISATION(4)`'' in the ``Enabled
Operations'' Pane. This has the effect of executing the initialization
and moving the machine into its initialized state. The lower half of the
ProB window should now look as follows (the upper half will remain
unchanged):

/file:ProB_LiftAfterInit.png[center||700px]

In the ``Enabled Operations'' pane we can see that two operations can be
executed: `inc` and `dec`. The ``History'' pane shows us that we have
executed ```INITIALISATION(4)`'' to reach the current state. In the
``State Properties'' pane we can see that the variable `floor` now has
value 4. The green ``OK'' button indicates that the invariant of the
machine is true. By clicking on the ``OK'' button, we obtain more
details about the invariant of the machine:

/file:ProB_LiftAfterInitInvariant.png[center]

Now, double click on ```dec`'' in the ``Enabled Operations'' Pane
thereby executing the associated operation. The lower half of the ProB
window should now look as follows:

/file:ProB_LiftAfterDec.png[center||700px]

As you can see, the lift is now on floor 3. You can also see in the
``Enabled Operations'' pane that the `inc` operation is colored in blue,
while `dec` is still colored in green. The blue color indicates that
executing this operation would lead us back to a state which we have
already explored (namely with `floor=4`). In the ``Enabled Operations''
pane you can also see a backward and forward arrow button. These buttons
work similar to a browser. Clicking on the back arrow will ``undo'' the
last animation step and lead us back to the previous state of the
machine:

/file:ProB_LiftAfterDecBack.png[center||700px]

This time, the forward button is also enabled which will undo the action
of the back button (i.e., re-apply the `dec` operation).
