ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
[width="100%",cols="60%,40%",]
|=======================================================================
a|
ProB is an animator, constraint solver and model checker for the
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/B-Method[B-Method] (see the
http://www.clearsy.com/en/our-specific-know-how/b-method/?lang=en[B-Method
site of Clearsy]). It allows fully automatic animation of B
specifications, and can be used to systematically check a specification
for a wide range of errors. The constraint-solving capabilities of ProB
can also be used for model finding,
link:/Constraint_Based_Checking[deadlock checking] and
link:/Test_Case_Generation[test-case generation].

The B language is rooted in predicate logic, arithmetic and set theory
and provides support for data structures such as (higher-order)
relations, functions and sequences. In addition to the B language, ProB
also supports http://www.event-b.org/[Event-B],
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communicating_sequential_processes[CSP-M],
http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/lamport/tla/tla.html[TLA+],
and http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Z_notation[Z]. ProB can be installed
within http://sourceforge.net/projects/rodin-b-sharp/[Rodin], where it
comes with
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/BMotionStudio/[BMotionStudio] to
easily generate domain specific graphical visualizations. (See
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/prob/[for an overview of ProB's components]).

ProB is being used within Siemens, Alstom, Thales and several other
companies for http://www.data-validation.fr[data validation] of
complicated properties for safety critical systems. For commercial
support contact the spin-off company http://www.formalmind.com[Formal
Mind] or http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/~leuschel/[Michael
Leuschel].

 a|
*News* *5/10/2017* link:/Download[ProB 1.7.1] is available. Highlights:
performance, Z support, export history to HTML.

*11/7/2017* link:/Download[ProB 1.7.0] is available. Highlights:
improved link:/Generating_Documents_with_ProB_and_Latex[Latex document
generation], improved XML/CSV data import and export, RULE DSL language,
improvements in solver.

*20/10/2016* link:/Download[ProB 1.6.1] is available. Highlights:
link:/Generating_Documents_with_ProB_and_Latex[Latex document
generation], /Tips:_B_Idioms[LET and IF-THEN-ELSE for expressions and
predicates].

*22/4/2016* link:/Download[ProB 1.6.0] is available. Highlights:
link:/Tutorial_Directed_Model_Checking[directed model checking],
link:/Using_ProB_with_Z3[Z3 as backend], B line comments and unicode
symbols.

*19/2/2015* link:/DownloadPriorVersions[ProB 1.5.0] is available.
link:/State_Space_Coverage_Analyses[MC/DC coverage], improved
link:/TLC[TLC interface].

*30/03/2012* link:/ProB_Logic_Calculator[ProB Logic Calculator]
available.

''' ''' link:/Download#Short_Release_History[More in Release History]

|=======================================================================

[[implementation]]
Implementation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The core of ProB is implemented in
http://www.sics.se/isl/sicstuswww/site/index.html[SICStus Prolog] (but
can be run without a SICStus Prolog license). The ProB constraint solver
is implemented using co-routining and the CLP(FD) finite domain library
of SICStus. An alternate link:/Using_ProB_with_KODKOD[constraint solver
based on Kodkod (and thus SAT)] is also available within ProB, as is
link:/Using_ProB_with_Z3[an integration with the SMT solver Z3]. An
alternate link:/TLC[model checking engine (using TLC)] well-suited for
lower level B specifications is also available. An integration with
https://github.com/utwente-fmt/ltsmin/releases[LTSmin] is also
available. The link:/ProBLicence[ProB Licence can be found here].
Automatically generated test
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/internal/coverage/html/[coverage reports are
also available].

[[features]]
Features
~~~~~~~~

ProB covers a link:/Summary_of_B_Syntax[large part of B], and we are
striving towards full coverage of Atelier B constructs. ProB supports B
features such as non-deterministic operations, arbitrary quantification,
sets, sequences, functions, lambda abstractions, set comprehensions,
records, and many more. ProB does support multiple machines,
refinements, and implementations. ProB can also be used for automated
link:/Refinement_Checking[refinement checking] and
link:/LTL_Model_Checking[LTL model checking]. It also
link:/CSP-M[supports almost full CSP-M] process descriptions, to be used
on their own or to guide B machines for specification and property
validation. The state space of the specifications can be
link:/Graphical_Viewer[graphically visualized]. ProB also supports Z
specifications (ProB in this context is sometimes called
link:/ProZ[ProZ]) as well as link:/TLA[TLA+ specifications]. We now also
have an online link:/ProB_Logic_Calculator[ProB Logic Calculator]. ProB
can be used within
http://www.atelierb.eu/en/2016/02/18/atelier-b-4-3-1-is-available-for-maintenance-holders/[Atelier-B
as a disprover and prover].
