ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
/Category:User_Manual[Category:User Manual] __NOTOC__ ProB provides
several user-friendly visualization features to help the user to analyze
and understand the behavior of his B specification. This feedback is
very beneficial to the understanding of the B specification since human
perception is good at identifying structural similarities and
symmetries. For more information on this particular topic, the reader
can refer to footnote:[M. Leuschel and E.Turner: Visualising larger
state spaces in ProB. In H. Treharne, S. King, M. Henson, and S.
Schneider, editors, ZB 2005: Formal Specification and Development in Z
and B, LNCS 3455. Springer-Verlag, 2005
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/publications/prob_visualise.pdf%5Bwiki:Visualisation#VisualizeStateSpace].

The visualization features of the states pace are in the ``Visualize''
menu, and comprise the command (visualize) ``Statespace'' and all the
commands of the sub-menu ``Statespace Projections''. It is important to
understand that those commands operate on the state space computed by
ProB at the current point during the animation. Each time the user
animates the B specification, the state space computed by ProB can be
expanded if the selected operations lead to states not already computed
by ProB. As shown in the following figure, the command (visualize)
``Statespace'' displays a diagram corresponding to the state space
currently explored by the animation in a separate window.

 image::Visualising_the_state_space.png[]

[[graph-nodes]]
Graph Nodes
^^^^^^^^^^^

ProB displays the state space as a graph whose nodes correspond to
states that are differentiated by their shapes and colors and arcs
correspond to operations. The operations are all those that are
displayed in the Enabled Operations pane except backtrack, which is only
useful for animation. Four types of nodes are visualized in ProB:

* *root* The point before the B machine is initialized when it has no
state;
* *current* The current state during the animation;
* *normal* The states that have been already computed during the
animation;
* *open* The states that are reachable from the normal states by an
enabled operation.

In addition to its type, a node can indicate that it corresponds to an
invariant violation, which is displayed by a color filling as shown in
the following figure

 image::Trace_to_invariant_violation.png[]

Finally, if you have specified a goal predicate (either using a
DEFINITION `GOAL == P` or by using a command such as ``Find state
satisfying predicate...'') then those predicates are coloured in orange.

[[statespace-projections]]
Statespace Projections
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The sub-menu ``Statespace Projections'' contains several other commands
that provide useful views on the state space.

The three next commands in the menu ``View Visited States|View'' provide
a means to display a simplified version of the state space. A more
detailed explanation is given in [multiblock footnote omitted].

The command ``Reduced Visited States'' displays a state space where
nodes sharing the same output arcs are collapsed into one node. The
command ``Reducted Deterministic Automaton of Visited States'' removes
the non-determinacy of the state space graph. The command ``Select
Operations & Arguments for Reduction'' is used to specify which
operations and arguments are affected by the previous transformations.

The two last commands of the ``Statespace Projections'' sub-menu display
subgraphs of the state space. The command ``Subgraph for Invariant
Violation'' displays the subgraph of nodes which violate the invariant,
while the command ``Subgraph of nodes satisfying GOAL'' displays the
subgraph where goals (discussed in
link:/Temporal_Model_Checking#Specifying_Goals_and_Assertions[Temporal
Model Checking]) are satisfied.

As of December 2015, there is also a sub-menu ``Statespace Fast
Rendering'', which enables one to visualize larger state spaces more
effectively. Some sample
link:/State_space_visualization_examples[visualizations can be found
here].

[[other-visualization-commands]]
Other Visualization Commands
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``Visualize'' menu contains several other sub-menus, to visualize
traces and individual states. The command ``Shortest Trace to Current
State'' displays the shortest sequence of nodes in the state space
starting from the root node and leading to the current node. The command
``Current State'' displays the current node and its successor nodes.

[[preferences-of-the-visualization]]
Preferences of the Visualization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Many aspects of the visualization can be configured in the ``Graphical
Viewer Preferences''... preference window of the ``Preferences'' menu.
This includes changing the shapes and colors of the various nodes (using
the notation of the dot tool, see
http://www.graphviz.org/cvs/doc/info/shapes.html[Dot-Shapes] and
http://www.graphviz.org/cvs/doc/info/colors.html[Dot-Colors]). For
selecting the colors, a color picker is available via the button Pick.
The user can also select which labels to display on the nodes (value of
variables) and arcs (operation arguments and return value of functions),
and their font size.

The default graph viewer in ProB is dotty, which is from the Graphviz
package. ProB enables the user to display the graph using a PostScript
viewer by setting the preference Use PostScript Viewer in the Graphical
Viewer Preferences to true.... The PostScript file is generated by the
dot tool. The path to the PostScript viewer can be set in the
``Path/Command'' for PostScript Viewer preference. The ``Pick'' button
can be used to select the path. _' WARNING: All paths to files and
folders should use the / character to separate the folders and should be
absolute._'

Using a postscript viewer rather than dotty has several advantages and
several drawbacks. Firstly, the assignment of node shapes and colors is
more accurately realized by dot (and therefore PostScript). Dotty on the
other hand is much easier to use when state spaces are large thanks to
the birds-eye view. A PostScript viewer also has the advantage that the
PostScript file may be used to capture visualizations for publication
purposes.

At present, the distinction between using a PostScript viewer as opposed
to dotty comes down to the difference in functionality between the
!GraphViz utilities dot and dotty. The main differences with respect to
visualization in ProB are are:

* For Postscript: Support for more visualization shapes (for example,
the shape double-octagon appears as a box on dotty);
* Against PostScript: dot does not support the addition of shapes to
arcs. With moderately large graphs, Dot may put nodes outside of the
printable or viewable area. Examining large graphs in a PostScript
viewer may be slow (it may be awkward to use pan and zoom). There is
less support for information on arcs (for example, dotted lines).
* For Dotty: Graphs can be modified. Dotty includes a birds-eye viewer
which is useful for examining large graphs.
* Against Dotty: Dotty may crash if the graph is too big or complex (and
on Solaris and Linux if non-standard mouse buttons are used).

[[references]]
References
~~~~~~~~~~
