ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
Consider an Event-B model formalizing an algorithm for mutual exclusion
with semaphores for two concurrent processes latexmath:[$P_1$] and
latexmath:[$P_2$]. Each process has been simplified to perform three
types of events: _request_ (for entering in the critical section),
_enter_ (entering the critical section), and _release_ (exiting the
critical section). (For more information on the algorithm and the design
of the model see footnote:[C.Baier and J.-P. Katoen. “Principles of
Model Checking”, The MIT Press, 2008, pages 43-45.]).

Each of the actions of a process are represented by a respective event:


image::LTLViewMUTEXEvents.png[]

Each process latexmath:[$P_i$] has three possible states that are
denoted by the constants latexmath:[$noncrit_{i}$] (the state in which
latexmath:[$P_i$] performs noncritical actions), latexmath:[$wait_{i}$]
(the state in which latexmath:[$P_{i}$] waits to enter the critical
section), and latexmath:[$crit_{i}$] (representing the state in which
latexmath:[$P_{i}$] is in the critical section). Both processes share
the binary semaphore y where y=1 indicates that the semaphore is free
and y=0 that the semaphore is currently processed by one of the
processes.

There are several requirements that the mutual exclusion algorithm
should satisfy. The most important one is the mutual exclusion property
that says _always at most one process is in its critical section_. This
can be simply expressed, for example, as an invariant of the respective
Event-B model: not(p1 = crit1 & p2 = crit2). However, there are other
properties that can be easily expressed by means of LTL formulas and
automatically checked on the model. For example, the requirement _each
process will enter infinitely often its critical section_ can be
specified by the LTL formula `GF \{p1 = crit1} & GF \{p2 = crit2}` or
the starvation freedom property that states _each waiting process will
eventually enter its critical section_:

`G ({p1 = wait1} => F {p1 = crit1}) & G ({p2 = wait2} => F {p2=crit2})`

Running the LTL model checker of ProB will provide for the last two
properties above a counterexample since the model permits that a process
may perform infinitely often consecutively the events _request_, _enter_
and _release_, and in this way to ignore the other process infinitely.
An example trace that describes this behavior could be
latexmath:[$\langle Req2,Req1,Enter1,Rel1,Req1,Enter1,\ldots\rangle$].

On the other hand, such behaviors can be considered as unrealistic
computations for the eventual implementation of the algorithm. Therefore
fairness constraints can be set in order to discard such behaviors. For
example, checking the property _process latexmath:[$P_1$] will enter its
critical section infinitely often_ (as LTL property: `GF \{p1 = crit1}`)
can be checked by restricting that the event `Req1` will not be
continuously ignored and that the event `Enter1` will not be ignored
infinitely often. Both conditions for the property can be given by means
of an LTL^[e]^ formula on the left side of the following implication:

`(FG e(Req1) => GF [Req1]) & (GF e(Enter1) => GF [Enter1]) => GF {p1 = crit1}`

For checking the formula the LTL model checker generates 13312
atomsfootnote:[The number of atoms generated for the search graph
corresponds to the number of valuations of the respective LTL^[e]^
formula times the number of states of the model.] and 7515 transitions
and needs overall 509 ms to prove the property (the model has 8 states
and 15 transitions in total). On the other hand, using the extension of
the LTL model checker for checking fairness (by entering the formula
`WF(Req1) & SF(Enter1) => GF \{p1=crit1}`), the model checker generates
32 atoms and 39 transitions (the atoms and transitions generated just
for `GF \{p1 = crit1}`) and an overall time of 50 ms.

For checking the requirement _each process will enter infinitely often
its critical section_ the LTL formula ` GF \{p1 = crit1} & GF \{p2 =
crit2}` should be checked with the following fairness constraints:

`(WF(Req1) & WF(Req2)) & (SF(Enter1) & SF(Enter2))`

Encoding these fairness conditions as an LTL^[e]^ formula will blow up
exponentially the number of atoms and the transitions in regard to the
number of temporal operators (in this case `G` (globally) and
`F`(finally)) and thus make practically impossible to check the above
property in a reasonable time.

[[references]]
References
~~~~~~~~~~
