ifndef::imagesdir[:imagesdir: ../../asciidoc/images/]
[[latest-release]]
Latest Release
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Details of the link:/ProBLicence[ProB Licence can be found here]. Note:
please use the provided start scripts (StartProB.sh or StartProBWin.bat)
to start ProB.

ProB is free to use and open source. For commercial support contact the
spin-off company http://www.formalmind.com[Formal Mind] or
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/~leuschel/[Michael Leuschel]. In
particular, we can provide access to the validation report for using
ProB as a tool of class T2 or T3 within the European norm
http://de.wikipedia.org/wiki/EN_50128[EN50128].

[cols=",,,",options="header",]
|=======================================================================
|Platform |Release Date |Download |Dependencies
|1.7.1-final

|Linux |5. October 2017
|http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/1.7.1/ProB.linux32.tar.gz[Tarball
(with probcli) (32bit)], +
http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/1.7.1/ProB.linux64.tar.gz[Tarball
(with probcli) (64bit)] + |http://java.com/en/[Java Runtime Environment
(7.0 or newer)], Tcl/Tk 8.5

|colspan=``4'' style=``background-color:lightgrey;'' style="height:20px;
|

|Windows |5. October 2017
|http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/1.7.1/ProB.windows32.zip[Zipfile
(with probcli) (32bit)], +
http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/1.7.1/ProB.windows64.zip[Zipfile
(with probcli) +
(64bit)] |http://downloads.activestate.com/ActiveTcl/releases/[Tcl/Tk
8.5 for Windows], http://java.com/en/[Java Runtime Environment (7.0 or
newer)], link:/Windows_Installation_Instructions[Windows Installation
Instructions] http://www.graphviz.org/Download_windows.php[GraphViz]

|colspan=``4'' style=``background-color:lightgrey;'' style="height:20px;
|

|OS X |12. October 2017
|http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/1.7.1/ProB.mac_os.x86_64.tar.gz[Tarball
(with probcli) (64bit)]
https://github.com/hhu-stups/homebrew-prob[Homebrew Tap] |OS X 10.9
(Mavericks) or newer,
http://www.activestate.com/activetcl/downloads/[Tcl/TK 8.5] (e.g.,
http://downloads.activestate.com/ActiveTcl/releases/8.5.18.0/[8.5.18.0]),
http://java.com/en/[Java Runtime Environment] or better
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html[Java
JDK] (7.0 or newer), http://www.pixelglow.com/graphviz/[Graphviz for Mac
OS X]
|=======================================================================

The B parser of ProB requires http://java.com/en/[Java] 7 or newer.
Sometimes you have to install the Java JDK (and not the JRE) so that the
new Java version becomes visible to command-line tools. The Graphical
User Interface of ProB Tcl/Tk requires Tcl/Tk 8.5. Note: If you wish to
use ProB on Windows XP you need the service pack SP3 installed.

[[prob-for-rodin]]
ProB for Rodin
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

To install ProB for Rodin, first download Rodin 2.8 or
http://sourceforge.net/projects/rodin-b-sharp/files/Core_Rodin_Platform/3.3/[Rodin
3.3], choose Help -> Install New Software and simply choose the
pre-configured ProB update site. (The pre-configured update site is
http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/prob_updates[http://www.stups.uni-duesseldorf.de/prob_updates]
for Rodin 2.8 and
http://www.stups.hhu.de/prob_updates_rodin3[http://www.stups.hhu.de/prob_updates_rodin3]
for Rodin 3.3. The update site for nightly builds for Rodin 3.x is
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob1/nightly[https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob1/nightly].)
More link:/Tutorial_Rodin_First_Step[detailed installation instructions
and a brief tutorial are available].

[[prior-versions]]
Prior Versions
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Prior Versions of ProB going back to 1.3.1
link:/DownloadPriorVersions[are available for download here]. If you are
interested in still earlier releases, please have a look at the
http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/releases/[Download
directory].

[[java-requirements-for-b-parser]]
Java Requirements for B parser
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The B parser of ProB 1.5.1 requires Java Runtime Environment (JRE) 7 or
newer. ProB 1.5.0 can be run with JRE 6. Note: on some systems (Mac OS
X) you may have to install the
http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/javase/downloads/index.html[Oracle
JDK/JSE] (and not just the JRE) so that Java 7 or 8 becomes available to
the command-line tools (type `java -version` to check which version is
used by default for command-line tools; see also
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/21964709/how-to-set-or-change-the-default-java-jdk-version-on-os-x[this
discussion on StackOverflow]). In case you have trouble starting the
Java parser you can now set the `JAVA_PATH` preference of ProB to point
to the java tool (or java.exe on Windows).

To check whether ProB can correctly use its Java parser you can type the
following (using probcli.exe on Windows):

`probcli -version -v`

This will try and start the parser and obtain the parser version. In
case Java is not correctly installed you should get an error message. On
Windows, you may see the error message

`Error occurred during initialization of VM`

on the console. This means you should probably
http://stackoverflow.com/questions/11808829/jre-1-7-returns-java-lang-noclassdeffounderror-java-lang-object[re-install
the Java JRE with admin rights] and try again. If you see the error
message

`Unsupported major.minor version 51.0`

this means you do not have Java 7 or newer installed. You can try
setting the path to the correct java version by setting the JAVA_PATH
preference as follows:

`probcli -p JAVA_PATH path/to/java -version -v`

[[tcltk-requirements-for-prob-tcltk]]
Tcl/Tk Requirements for ProB Tcl/Tk
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ProB Tcl/Tk requires an installation of Tcl/Tk 8.5. The command-line
tool probcli does not require this. Please note that Tcl/Tk 8.6 is not
yet generally supported by SICStus Prolog (even though ProB may work
with Tcl/Tk 8.6; we recommend installing Tcl/Tk 8.5 though).

[[tcltk-on-mac-osx]]
Tcl/Tk on Mac OS/X
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Note: for Mac OS you may have to install
http://www.activestate.com/activetcl/downloads/[the ActiveTcl version of
Tcl/Tk] (e.g.,
http://downloads.activestate.com/ActiveTcl/releases/8.5.18.0/[8.5.18.0])
as indicated above (the distribution provided by Apple is typically
broken, e.g., after opening a file using the standard file selection
dialog some versions crash). However, even the version of Active Tcl/Tk
on Mac can be quite unreliable and prone to crashing; for example
version http://bugs.python.org/issue15853[8.5.12 has a serious bug
related to copying text], see also
http://sourceforge.net/tracker/?func=detail&aid=3555211&group_id=12997&atid=112997_type[here]).
This issue has been fixed in version 8.5.13 or later.

[[tcltk-on-windows]]
Tcl/Tk on Windows
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Starting with ProB 1.3.5 you can now use ProB with Tcl/Tk 8.5 on
Windows. If you have the older version of Tcl/Tk 8.4 you have to install
the newer one 8.5 (you should be able to also keep the older version).
For Windows we recommend installing
http://downloads.activestate.com/ActiveTcl/releases/[ActiveTcl-8.5]
(e.g.,
http://downloads.activestate.com/ActiveTcl/releases/8.5.18.0/[8.5.18.0]).
Note: For the 64 bit version of ProB for Windows, you have to install
the 64 bit Tcl/Tk 8.5 version! If you wish to use ProB on Windows XP you
need the service pack SP3 installed.

[[tcltk-on-linux]]
Tcl/Tk on Linux
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

On Linux you can typically install Tcl/Tk using
`sudo apt-get install tcl8.5 tk8.5`. On Linux OpenSuse (12.3) you may
have to perform the following for ProB to work:

`ln -s /usr/lib/libtk8.5.so /usr/lib/libtk8.5.so.0` +
`ln -s /usr/lib/libtcl8.5.so /usr/lib/libtcl8.5.so.0`

Also, some of the feature require the table extension, which can be installed like this:
`sudo apt install tk-table`
Finally, support for .png ANIMATION_IMG declarations requires the Img package:
`sudo apt install libtk-img`

[[nightly-build]]
Nightly Build
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

* You can download our
http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/tcltk/nightly/[nightly
integration build from here]. Note: if you wish to use the fast
rendering for large state spaces, you need the sfdp tool of GraphViz
(ideally version 2.28 or newer with the triangulation library; when
installing using brew use the option `--with-gts`; see the section
below).
* Automatically generated test
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/internal/coverage/html/[coverage reports are
also available].
* Nightly builds of ProB for Rodin 3 can be obtained from within Rodin
by using the update site
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob1/nightly[https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob1/nightly].
* Nightly builds of ProB 2 (experimental) for Rodin 3 can be obtained
from within Rodin using the update site
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob2/nightly/[https://www3.hhu.de/stups/rodin/prob2/nightly/]
(this will probably be replaced by a Java FX version in the future)
* A beta version of the new
link:/ProB2_JavaFX_UI_Java_FX_UI_(aka_ProB2_FX)[ProB2_JavaFX_UI Java FX
UI (aka ProB2 FX)] is available at
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob2/[https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob2/].

[[graphviz-requirements]]
Graphviz Requirements
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you wish to view various visualizations generated by ProB Tcl/Tk or
probcli you will need http://www.graphviz.org/[GraphViz]. ProB may use
the command-line tool `dot`, a dot-file viewer such as `dotty`.

On Mac you can now install the latest version of Graphviz using brew:

`1. brew uninstall graphviz` +
`2. brew install graphviz --with-gts` +
`3. brew link --overwrite graphviz`

Step 1. is optional; you only need to use it if you have a prior version
of Graphviz installed. Step3 links the binaries to /usr/local/bin. This
is probably better than using the
http://www.pixelglow.com/graphviz/[older version from Pixelglow].

Note: if you wish to use the fast rendering for large state spaces in
ProB 1.7.x, you need the sfdp tool of GraphViz (ideally version 2.28 or
newer with the triangulation library; when installing using brew use the
option --with-gts; see the section below).
ProB 1.8.1 only uses the dot binary, making use of the -Ksfdp option.

[[timed-csp-simulator]]
Timed-CSP Simulator
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A version of ProB with built-in support for timed CSP developed by
http://cs.swansea.ac.uk/~csnga/timed-csp-simulator.html[Swansea
University (UK)] is available on here:
https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/timed-csp/[https://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/timed-csp/]

[[sourcecode]]
Sourcecode
~~~~~~~~~~

You can download the latest sourcecode snapshot from:
http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/source/[http://www3.hhu.de/stups/downloads/prob/source/]

[[short-release-history]]
Short Release History
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

*20/03/2018* link:/Download[ProB 1.8.0] is available. Highlights: terminal colour support, performance improvements for displaying very large values, improved symmetry breaking and constraint solving.

*5/10/2017* link:/Download[ProB 1.7.1] is available. Highlights:
performance, non-deterministic assigned variables shown, Z improvements,
export history to HTML.

*11/7/2017* link:/Download[ProB 1.7.0] is available. Highlights:
improved link:/Generating_Documents_with_ProB_and_Latex[Latex document
generation], improved XML/CSV data import and export, RULE DSL language,
many improvements in constraint solver.

*20/10/2016* link:/Download[ProB 1.6.1] is available. Highlights:
link:/Generating_Documents_with_ProB_and_Latex[Latex document
generation], LET and IF-THEN-ELSE for expressions and predicates, XML
logging, XML data import, performance improvements.

*22/4/2016* link:/Download[ProB 1.6.0] is available. Highlights:
link:/Tutorial_Directed_Model_Checking[directed model checking],
link:/Using_ProB_with_Z3[Z3 available as backend], B line comments and
unicode symbols, improved error messages, performance improvements.

*19/2/2015* link:/Download[ProB 1.5.0] is available. Highlights:
improved random enumeration, MACE/SEM style static symmetry reduction
for deferred set elements, link:/State_Space_Coverage_Analyses[MC/DC
coverage] analysis for guards and invariants, link:/TLC[improved TLC
interface], bug fixes and improvements including but not limited to the
constraint solver.

*29/8/2014* link:/Download[ProB 1.4.1], a small bugfix-only release is
available. For a list of new features in 1.4.0 see below.

*18/8/2014* link:/Download[ProB 1.4.0] is available. Highlights:
CLP(FD)-based constraint solver enabled by default, kernel can handle
more operations symbolically, link:/TLC[integration of the TLC model
checker], bug fixes and performance improvements.

*4/3/2013* link:/Download[ProB 1.3.6] is available. Highlights: improved
constraint propagation for division, modulo, intervals, model checking
progress bar, performance improvements,
link:/Using_ProB_with_KODKOD[improved Kodkod backend] and use within
REPL, and many more.

*8/10/2012* link:/Download[ProB 1.3.5] is available. Highlights: support
for external and recursive functions, optional Kodkod backend,
link:/TLA[TLA+ support], performance improvements, pragmas, units
inference, and many more.

*30/03/2012* A first prototype of an online
link:/ProB_Logic_Calculator[ProB Logic Calculator] is available.

*21/11/2011* ProB 1.3.4 is available. Highlights: Evaluation View and
Eval window, CSP assertion checking, improved editor, 64-bit version for
Mac and Linux, performance improvements, and many more.

*10/02/2011* ProB 1.3.3 and ProB for Rodin 2.3 is available. Highlights:
improved performance, constrained-based deadlock checking, record
detection, and many more.

*07/30/2010* ProB 1.3.2 is available. Highlights: improved performance,
constraint solving over integers (enable in Advanced Preferences), much
improved Z support, and many more.

*12/07/2009* ProB 1.3.1 is available. Highlights: new data-structure for
large sets and relations (see FM 2009), multi-level validation for
Event-B, improved constraint propagation for boolean connectives, and
many more.

*03/20/2009* ProB 1.3.0 is available for download. Highlights: New
parser and integrated typechecker, install as AtelierB plugin, improved
kernel with support for large sets/relations, improved CSP support,
faster LTL model checker, Undo/Redo in text editor, graphical formula
viewer, user definable custom animations with gifs.

The full link:/ProB_Release_History[ProB release history can be found
here].
